---
layout: left-menu
title: Introduction

order: 0
---



### About the Reference Manual
---------------------

The ‘*JDemetra+ Reference Manual*’ aims to introduce the user to
the main features of JDemetra+ software and assist the user to take
advantage of this powerful tool. The ‘*JDemetra+ Reference Manual*’
presents an overview of the capabilities of the software and
includes detailed documentation on all of the specifications, with
discussions of the available arguments and their default values. Also
the results displayed by JDemetra+ are elaborated. Step-by-step
descriptions of how to perform a typical analysis and useful tips that
facilitate replication of the results with the user’s own data and
working instructions are included in the‘*JDemetra+ User Guide*’ section.

JDemetra+ uses the notation "X12", "X13","Arima", "RegArima", "Tramo",
"Seats" and "TramoSeats" instead of "X-12-ARIMA", "X-13ARIMA-SEATS",
"ARIMA", "RegARIMA", "TRAMO", "SEATS" and "TRAMO/SEATS" respectively.
This notation is also used in the ‘*JDemetra+ Reference Manual*’
only when the references to the user interface are made.

### Users to whom the Reference Manual is intended {#users-to-whom-this-document-is-intended}

The ‘*JDemetra+ Reference Manual*’ can be used by beginners, i.e.
those who have only basic knowledge about the idea of seasonality and
its estimation in time series, as well as by users who have already
acquired some experience from seasonal adjustment using relevant
software and are able to interpret the outcomes, at least on a basic
level.

This document does not describe the detailed working of the seasonal
adjustment methods, nor the underlying mathematics. It assumes that the
reader has acquired a background knowledge on the concept of seasonal
adjustment and is familiar with the X-12-ARIMA, the X-13ARIMA-SEATS and
the TRAMO/SEATS methods. A brief outline of the X-12-ARIMA, the
X-13ARIMA-SEATS and the TRAMO/SEATS algorithms and concepts is included.
For readers interested in studying the seasonal adjustment methods
further, a bibliography is provided in Chapter 10.

It is assumed that the reader is familiar with concepts, such as
*stochastic and* *deterministic processes,* *time series*,
*trend-cycle*, *seasonality*, *descriptive statistics*, *confidence
level*, *mean square error*, *estimate*, *estimator*, *linear
regression, stationarity*, *ARIMA process* and so on. Readers with
insufficient background to follow this document are encouraged to refer
to an appropriate textbook, e.g. CHATFIELD (2004). Some background
knowledge about seasonality in the time series can be gained from the
e-learning courses on seasonal adjustment that are available at [<span
class="underline">http://www.sa-elearning.eu/</span>](http://www.sa-elearning.eu/).

### How the Reference Manual is organised {#how-the-document-is-organised}

The ‘*JDemetra+ Reference Manual*’ is divided into seven parts,
including an introduction and Annex. The first two parts are designed to
provide the user with necessary information about software and this
document. The next chapters explore JDemetra+ capabilities and focus on
functionalities that refer to the particular types of actions. They are
further divided according to specific elements of the subject.

General information about JDemetra+ including an installation procedure
is presented in Chapter 1. It also informs about the prerequisites and
intended user’s profile.

Chapter 2 gives an overview of the software and explains the purpose of
the main windows.

Chapter 3 discusses application menu and presents the available options.

An overview of the modelling features from the *Workspace* window is the
focus of Chapter 4. It explains the options for the modelling
specifications, explores the modelling facilities with TRAMO and
RegARIMA models and gives insights into the output.

Chapter 5 discusses the options for the seasonal adjustment
specifications and presents in detail the seasonal adjustment results
from the pre-defined and user-defined specifications.

Chapter 6 elaborates on the calendars in JDemetra+ and user-defined
regression variables. Both functionalities are designed to enhance the
modelling capabilities of JDemetra+ and provide a better input for the
decomposition stage.

Annex describes selected aspects of the seasonal adjustment methods and
technical issues including descriptions of the theoretical models used
by X-12-ARIMA and TRAMO/SEATS. These descriptions of the seasonal
adjustment related concepts are vital for a good understanding of the
results produced by the software.

